THE NIGHT SKY
Seasons, Eclipses, and Time 
-----------------

The reason stars twinkle is because of motion
  a)      on their surface
  b)      of the Earth
  c)      of the solar system
 $d)      of gas in Earth's atmosphere
  e)      relative to the observer.

Which of the following stellar properties can you estimate simply by
looking up on a clear night? 
  a) Distance.  
  b) Brightness.
  c) Surface temperature. 
  d) Both a and b. 
 $e) Both b and c. 

If the Moon rises at 9pm tonight, tomorrow night it will rise at about
  a) 10:00pm
  b)  9:00pm
  c) 10:30pm
 $d)  9:50pm
  e) none of these

According to the heliocentric model, the reason the planets
  always appear to be near the ecliptic is that  
  a)  the ecliptic is only 23.5 degrees from the celestial equator
 $b)  the planets revolve around the Sun in nearly the same  plane
  c)  compared to the stars, the planets are near the Sun.
  d)  the planets come much nearer to us than does the Sun.
  
If the Earth were in an orbit farther from the Sun than it is now,
  a)  the day would be longer
  b)  the day would be shorter
 $c)  the year would be longer
  d)  the year would be shorter
  e)  Two of the above are correct

The sidereal day (a full rotation of the Earth measured relative to
distant stars) is 4 minutes SHORTER than a Solar Day. If the Earth's spin
were in the opposite direction then a sidereal day would
    a)  not change.
    b)  change, but remain shorter than a solar day.
   $c)  be longer than a solar day.
    d)  be the same as a solar day.

Earth rotates around its axis in a counter-clockwise direction, when
viewed looking down on the North Pole.  A newly discovered planet
revolves in the same sense but spins backwards relative to 
Earth.  If it revolves in 365 1/4 days and spins in 23 hours
56 minutes (just like Earth but backwards spin) which of the following
is true?  Its day is ______.  
 $a) less than 23 hours 56 minutes
  b) between 23 hours 56 minutes and 24 hours 
  c) 24 hours long (just like Earth)
  d) more 24 hours

In the northern hemisphere, the stars rise in the East, set in the West and
revolve counter-clockwise around the North celestial pole.  In the southern
hemisphere the stars rise in the
   a) East, set in the West and revolve anti-clockwise around the South celestial pole.
  $b) East, set in the West and revolve clockwise around the South celestial pole.
   c) West, set in the East and revolve clockwise around the South celestial pole
   d) West, set in the East and revolve anti-clockwise around the South celestial pole.


The Celestial Sphere
---------------------

In order to see the greatest number of stars possible throughout the
period of one year, a person should be located at latitude
    a) 90 degrees
    b) 45 degrees
   $c) 0 degrees
    d) anywhere, since latitude makes no difference. 

The "equatorial system" of coordinates                        
   a) uses the celestial equator as a fundamental reference circle  
   b) uses the vernal equinox as a fundamental reference point  
   c) is "attached" to the celestial sphere                     
   d) uses two angles to define a direction in the sky          
  $e) All of the other answers are correct                      

The physical basis for the equatorial system of coordinates is 
   a) gravity                                                   
  $b) the rotation of the Earth                                 
   c) the revolution of the Earth about the Sun                 
   d) revolution of the Sun about the center of the galaxy      
                                                              
The celestial equator is                                        
  a) the path of the Sun compared to the stars.             
  b) the path of the Moon compared to the stars.            
 $c) always directly overhead at the Earth's equator.       
  d) the average path of planets on a star chart.           
  e) always along the horizon for people on Earth's equator.     

The ecliptic can be described as the 
  a) projection of the Earth's equator onto the celestial sphere.
  b) path of a solar eclipse across the Earth
 $c) Earth's orbital plane projected onto the celestial sphere.
  d) apparent path of the Moon on the celestial sphere
 $e) apparent path of the Sun on the celestial sphere
     (NOTE: More than one answer possible)

Precession is the
  a) accuracy with which numbers are given in astronomy
 $b) slow motion of the Earth's rotation axis on the celestial sphere
  c) apparent backward motion of planets on the celestial sphere
  e) daily eastward motion of the Sun around the celestial sphere

If the star Aldebaran rises tonight at 2:00 a.m., when do you expect
it to rise next month? 
  a)      11:00 pm
 $b)      midnight
  c)      1:00 am
  d)      2:00 am
  e)      3:00 am

Ecuador is Spanish for equator.  It's September 21 and you're in the
capitol, Quito.  At noon, how many degrees above the horizon is the Sun? 
  a)  0
  b)  30
  c)  45
  d)  60
 $e)  90

An object transits (crosses your meridian).  For that night, the
object has achieved its highest 
  a) declination.
 $b) altitude.
  c) azimuth.
  d) airmass.

The zenith distance of Polaris, the "North Star"
  a) is always 90 degrees
  b) is always 23.5 degrees
  c) is always 0 degrees
 $d) varies with your latitude

You're stranded on a desert island.  You locate the pole star
Polaris. It is 17 degrees above the northern horizon. What is your
latitude?
     a) 73 degrees south 
    $b) 17 degrees north 
     c) 73 degrees north 
     d) 17 degrees south 


Seasons
---------

In the northern hemisphere, the full moons transit highest in the sky
during 
  a) summer
  b) autumn
 $c) winter
  d) spring

The ecliptic makes its smallest angle with the southern horizon during
 $a) summer.
  b) autumn.
  c) winter.
  d) spring.

On the first day of winter in New York, the Sun sets
  a)  north of west
  b)  directly west
 $c)  south of west
  d)  Any of the above, depending upon your location on Earth
  
What causes winter to be cooler than summer?
  a)  The Earth is closer to the Sun in summer than in winter
  b)  The daylight period is longer in summer
  c)  The Sun gets higher in the sky in summer
 $d)  both B and C
  e)  all of the above
                           
What is the declination of the Sun on the first day of spring?
 $a) 0 degrees
  b) 45 degrees
  c) 75 degrees
  d) The Sun has no declination because it isn't a fixed star

Northerners have cold days in January because 
  a) the Earth is farthest from the Sun in January.
  b) the orbital velocity of the Earth is largest in January.
 $c) the Sun is lower in the sky in January.
  d) El Nino is always strong in January.

Suppose you are visiting Australia in August. Which of the following 
is true?  It is
 $a) winter and the Sun rises in the northeast.
  b) summer and the Sun rises in the northeast.
  c) winter and the Sun rises in the southeast.
  d) summer and the Sun rises in the southeast.

Imagine a planet whose rotation axis is perpendicular to its 
orbital plane.  How would you describe its seasons?
  a)  shorter than those on Earth
  b)  longer than those on Earth
 $c)  constant
  d)  the same as those on Earth


Time
---------

A hypothetical planet whose orbit has a semi-major axis twice that of
Earth's orbit will have a sidereal period of about
  a) 1.0 Earth year.
  b) 0.3 Earth year.
 $c) 2.8 Earth years.
  d) 8.0 Earth years.

From the day of the summer solstice to the day of the autumnal
equinox, the azimuth of Sunrise
 $a) shifts toward the east.
  b) shifts toward the west.
  c) shifts toward the south.
  d) shifts toward the north.
  e) remains constant.

From the day of the vernal equinox to the day of the summer solstice,
the azimuth of sunset
  a) shifts toward the east.
  b) shifts toward the west.
  c) shifts toward the south.
 $d) shifts toward the north.
  e) remains constant.

A sundial yields
  a) universal time.
  b) local sidereal time.
  c) local mean solar time.
 $d) local apparent solar time.
  e) eastern standard time.

The difference between mean solar time and apparent solar time
  a) varies to plus or minus one hour throughout the year.
  b) is called daylight savings time.
 $c) is called the equation of time.
  d) remains constant throughout the year.


Eclipses
---------

The phase of the Moon at a lunar eclipse
 $a) is always full
  b) is always new
  c) is always waning crescent
  d) is always waxing gibbous
  e) may be anything depending on the geometry

The phase of the Moon at a solar eclipse
  a) is always full
 $b) is always new
  c) is always waning crescent
  d) is always waxing gibbous
  e) may be anything depending on the geometry

