THE PLANETS
-------------

You visit a hot little planet that rotates on its axis in 2 hours,
while it revolves closely around its sun every 25 hours.  You
construct for the inhabitants an excellent calendar with a leap year
that occurs in one time every 
    a) year.
   $b) 2 years.
    c) 12 years.
    d) 25 years.

Order the following by increasing radius. 
       I. Sun
      II. Jupiter's orbit around Sun
     III. Earth's orbit around Sun
      IV. Sun's orbit around the Galaxy
   a) III, II, I, IV
   b) I, II, III, IV
  $c) I, III, II, IV
   d) I, II, IV, III

Mnemonic: My Very Educated Mother Just Showed Us Nine Planets.
Which planet(s) can never be seen on the meridian at midnight?
 $a)  Mercury
 $b)  Venus
  c)  Mars
  d)  Jupiter
  e)  Saturn
  (Note: Mark all possible correct answers)

The surface of Venus is mostly low density rock, while the average
density of Venus is similar to that of Earth. The interior of Venus is
therefore 
  a) rapidly rotating
  b) composed of low density material
 $c) denser than the average density of Earth
  d) invisible 
  e) homogeneous

How much more solar energy does Venus receive than the Earth,
due to the fact that Venus is 0.72 times as far from the Sun?
  a) 0.72 times as much
  b) 1/0.72 = 1.4 times as much
  c) 0.72 (squared) = 0.52 times as much
 $d) (1/0.72) (squared) = 1.92 times as much
  e) 0.28 times as much.

From Earth, Mercury is difficult to see mostly because it
  a) has low albedo
  b) is very dense
  c) is very small
 $d) always appears near the Sun

Mercury's atmosphere is likely to be weak or non-existent because of its
  a) small mass
  b) slow rotation
  c) high surface temperature
  d) high density
 $e) (a) and (c)

Volcanos on Mars have become much larger than on Earth mostly because
Mars lacks 
  a) a thick atmosphere
  b) flowing water
 $c) plate tectonics
  d) a large moon

Satellites of Mars probably formed
  a) out of a merger of telecommunications giants
  b) out of the same material from which Mars formed
 $c) in the asteroid belt, and were later captured
  d) in the Oort Cloud
  e) as a result of cometary bombardment

Synchrotron radiation is produced
 $a) by electrons moving rapidly in a magnetic field
  b) by electrons traveling with a velocity determined by the temperature of the gas in which they are found
  c) by a "blackbody"
  d) by microwave ovens

The atmosphere of Jupiter has few heavy elements due to
  a) evaporation 
  b) the lack of heavy elements in the outer solar system
  c) the vacuum-like power of the Great Red Spot
 $d) gravitational settling toward the planet's center

Jupiter's chemical composition is closest to that of
  a) Earth
 $b) the Sun
  c) Mars
  d) the Moon
  e) Venus

The shape of Jupiter's magnetic field is flattened because of
the solar wind and the 
  a) low temperatues in the outer solar system
  a) planet's strong gravity
 $c) planet's rotation
  d) many moons

Io's volcanic activity is driven mostly by heat from 
  a) radioactivity
 $b) the Jupiter-Io tidal force
  c) Jupiter's magnetic fields
  d) the solar wind

Synchrotron radiation from Saturn implies that the planet has
  a) powerful electrical storms
  b) an unseen companion
 $c) a magnetic field
  d) excess thermal radiation

The sizes of particles comprising Saturn's rings are studied by analyzing
  a) shadows cast by the rings.
 $b) how light is scattered by the ring particles.
  c) excess radiation emitted by the rings.
  d) excess radiation emitted by the planet that is blocked by the rings.

Uranus is peculiar because its 
  a) radius is so large
  b) orbit is highly eccentric
  c) orbit is strongly inclined to the ecliptic plane
 $d) axis of rotation is in the ecliptic plane

Seasons on Uranus are 
  a) as long as Uranus' year
  b) non-existent
 $d) one fourth of Uranus' year, or about 20 Earth years long
  e) four times Uranus' year, or about 320 Earth years long

Uranus is surrounded by a cloud of
  a) asteroids
 $b) hydrogen
  c) helium
  d) water molecules

Which of the following is correct?
  a) the rotation axes of planets are perpendicular to
     their orbital plane (the ecliptic)
 $b) no planet's orbital inclination is more than 20 degrees from the
     ecliptic  
  c) planets orbits are circular 
  d) planets always rotate and revolve in the same direction 


Which of following are correct?
  $a) The Earth is closest to the Sun in January.
   b) The Earth is farthest from the Sun in January.
   c) The Earth is always at the same distance from the Sun.
   d) It's cold in winter because the Earth is farther from the Sun.

Which of the following are correct?
  a) Mars is essentially in the same orbit as the Earth.
  b) There are canals filled with liquid water on Mars.
  c) If there is water, that means there is oxygen and therefore that we
  can breathe on Mars.
  d) All of the above.
 $e) None of the above.

 The terrestrial (inner) planets are characterized by
(more than one answer may apply)
  a) low density
  b) rapid rotation
  c) large size
 $d) rocky composition

Which of the following characterizes Jovian planets?
(more than one answer may apply)
  a) high density
  b) slow rotation
  c) small size
 $d) mostly hydrogen and helium

The Jovian planets have retained most of their atmospheres because
  a)  they are further from the Sun's gravitational pull than the
  terrestrial planets. 
  b)  they are very warm and massive
 $c)  they are very cold and massive
  d)  the planet's rings "fence in" the planetary atmosphere

What is responsible for heating the terrestrial planets from inside?
  a)  temperature
  b)  solar radiation
 $c)  radioactivity
  d)  fusion
  
A planet can never be seen at opposition whose orbit relative to the
Earth's has a 
     $a)  smaller radius
 b)  larger radius
 c)  longer year
 d)  greater ellipticity

The synodic period of a planet is the time during which a body in the
solar system makes one orbit of the Sun relative to the Earth, i.e.,
returns to the same elongation. For a superior planet to the Earth, as
the synodic period increases, its sidereal period must
 a) increase
     $b) decrease
 c) stay the same

Consider the planets closer to the Sun than Jupiter. Of these planets,
the two with the largest elongations have the ______ distances from
the Sun. 
     $a) largest
 b) smallest
 c) the same
 d) Not enough information.

 If Venus is observed to have a crescent phase while its elongation angle 
(away from the Sun) is 20 degrees, it must be ________ to/from the Earth 
than the Sun is. 
     $a) closer 
     b) farther 
     c) equally distant 
     d) can't tell from the information given. 
  
Venus is unusual because of its retrograde rotation. This means
that Venus
    a)  rotates much more slowly than the other planets
    b)  does not always rotate with its axis at the same angle to the
   plane of the ecliptic
   $c)  rotates in an opposite direction compared to most other planets
   in the solar system
    d)  changes its direction of rotation

The retrograde loops of Saturn are smaller than those of Jupiter because
   a) Saturn moves more slowly in its orbit
  $b) Saturn is farther away, and loop size is largely determined by
 the planet's parallax
   c) the motions of Saturn are more gradual since it has a lower
 temperature 
   d) the older parts of the solar system move in smaller circular motions 

Why do Mercury and the Moon have almost no atmosphere?
  $a) The gravity at their surfaces is low, so most gas molecules
 travel fast enough to escape the planet.
   b) The temperature at their surfaces is high, so most gas molecules
 travel fast enough to escape the planet.
   c) The only gas molecules that they had originally were low in
 mass, so that they were immediately able to escape.
   d) They are both highly reflective.

What might Mars have had it had a mass closer to those of Earth and Venus?  
   a) an active interior.
   b) a larger atmosphere than Earth.
   c) abundant water, but larger ice caps.
   d) a magnetic field.
  $e) all of the above

Which of the following assumptions of the original solar nebula
hypothesis is probably wrong, in light of the evidence provided by
extrasolar planets so far? 
   a) Planets as massive as the Jovian planets must be composed  primarily of hydrogen and helium.
   b) Jovian planets are likely to form relatively far from the star.
  $c) Planetary orbits do not shrink after the planet forms.
   d) Centrifugal forces (due to increasing orbital speeds) prevent the gas in the solar nebula from being pulled into the star.

For a superior planet in our solar system, the correct sequence of
events as seen from Earth is
  a) opposition, eastern quadrature, western quadrature, conjunction.
  b) opposition, western quadrature, conjunction, eastern quadrature.
 $c) opposition, eastern quadrature, conjunction, western quadrature
  d) conjunction, eastern quadrature, western quadrature, opposition.

For an inferior planet in our solar system, the correct sequence of
events as seen from Earth is
 $a) superior conjunction, greatest eastern elongation, inferior conjunction, greatest western elongation.
  b) inferior conjunction, greatest eastern elongation, inferior conjunction, greatest western elongation.
  c) superior conjunction, greatest western elongation, inferior conjunction, greatest eastern elongation.
  d) inferior conjunction, greatest eastern elongation, opposition, greatest western elongation.

As seen from Earth, a superior planet can never be observed at
  a) superior conjunction.
  b) quadrature.
 $c) inferior conjunction.
  d) opposition.
  e) none of these.

When at greatest western elongation, Venus may be observed
 $a) west of the Sun in the morning sky.
  b) west of the Sun in the evening sky.
  c) east of the Sun in the morning sky.
  d) east of the Sun in the evening sky.

When at greatest eastern elongation, Venus may be observed
  a) west of the Sun in the morning sky.
  b) west of the Sun in the evening sky.
  c) east of the Sun in the morning sky.
 $d) east of the Sun in the evening sky.

The greatest elongation of Mercury is
  a) about 45 degrees.
  b) about 90 degrees.
 $c) about 28 degrees.
  d) about 23.5 degrees.

When Jupiter is at quadrature, the angle between Jupiter and the Sun as
seen from Earth is
  a) 0 degrees.
 $b) 90 degrees.
  c) 180 degrees.
  d) 45 degrees.

When Saturn is at conjunction, the angle between Saturn and the Earth
as seen from the Sun is
  a) 0 degrees.
  b) 90 degrees.
 $c) 180 degrees.
  d) 45 degrees.

When Mercury is at greatest elongation, the angle between Earth and the
Sun as seen from Mercury is
  a) 0 degrees.
 $b) 90 degrees.
  c) 180 degrees.
  d) 45 degrees.

Mars is 
  a) observed at opposition every year.
  b) observed at opposition twice a year.
 $c) observed at opposition every two years.
  d) never observed at opposition.
