SCALES OF SIZE, DISTANCE, MASS, POWER 
-------------------------------------

Arrange the following items according to size, from the       
smallest to the largest.                                      
   $a) atom, planet, Sun, galaxy, cluster of galaxies.
    b) proton, galaxy, open cluster, cluster of galaxies.
    c) proton, star, galaxy, solar system.
    d) Sun, solar system, cluster of galaxies, globular star cluster.

The establishment of a reliable cosmic distance scale is a "bootstrap
process" because 
    a) distance steps are all calibrated independently
   $b) each distance step calibrates the next step
    c) scientists build from past work
    d) the Hubble Constant calibrates all the steps

The largest identifiable structures in the universe are 
    a) clusters with hundreds of galaxies.
   $b) filaments with galaxy clusters along them 
    c) galaxies like our own. 
    d) giant stars.
                         
The cosmological principle enables astronomers to generalize
from what they observe to the properties of the universe as a whole.  
The principle states that any and all observers, everywhere in space, 
should see, on average, the same picture of the universe as us on
scales comparable to 
    a) the solar system.
    b) the galaxy.
   $c) superclusters of galaxies.
    d) atoms and subatomic particles.

The distance between the Sun and its nearest star is smaller
than the distance from the Milky Way Galaxy to the next 
nearest large galaxy Andromeda by a factor of about
    a) a hundred
    b) a thousand
   $c) a million
    d) a billion

Comparing the Moon's orbit around the Earth to the Sun's
orbit around the Galactic center is like comparing the width
of a human hair (about one micron or millionth of a meter) to
   a) a human.
  $b) the distance between Boston and Washington, D.C.
   c) the Moon's orbit around the Sun.
   d) the size of the Galaxy.

If the Sun were the size of a tennis ball (6.35 centimeters)
then the Earth and Jupiter would orbit at  distances of about
   a) 7 and 35 centimeters, respectively
  $b) 7 and 35 meters, respectively
   c) 7 and 15 meters, respectively
   d) 0.7 and 3.5 kilometers, respectively

How many planet Earths could fit inside the Sun, which has a radius 
100 times larger than the Earth's?
    a) A few hundred
    b) A few thousand.
   $c) About a million.
    d) A billion.

About what angular resolution is required to resolve the image of two
stars separated by 2 AU in a binary system, if the binary is only
1 parsec (about 200,000 AU) from Earth?  
    a) 10 degrees
    b) 10 arcmin
   $c) 10 arcsec
    d) 10 milliarcsec


