BASIC STELLAR PROPERTIES
------------------------- 

Stars are
   a) solid.
   b) liquid.
  $c) gaseous.
   d) mostly carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and iron. 
   e) both c and d.

If the Sun were the size of a tennis ball (6.35 cm in diameter) then
the red giant star Betelgeuse would have a diameter of
   a) 2.3cm, about the size of a ping pong ball
   b) 23cm, about the size of a basketball
  $c) 23m, larger than the equivalent size of Mars' orbit
   d) 23km 

Most of the brightest stars in the sky are
   a) relatively hot main-sequence stars that are relatively
      close to the Sun.
   b) relatively cool giant stars that are relatively close to
      the Sun.
   c) relatively cool main-sequence stars that are relatively far
      from the Sun.  
   d) relatively cool main-sequence stars that are relatively
      close to the Sun. 
  $e) giant stars and relatively hot main sequence stars.

Two stars have the same chemical composition, spectral type, and
luminosity class, but one is 10 light years from the Earth and
the other is 1000 light years from the Earth. How much fainter
does the farther star appear to be?
   a) 10 times fainter.
   b) 100 times fainter. 
  $c) 10,000 times fainter.
   d) 100,000,000 times fainter.
   e) The stars are identical so they are the same brightness.

Two stars have the same surface temperature, but the radius of
one is 100 times that of the other. How much more luminous is the
larger star?
   a) 10 times more luminous.
   b) 100 times more luminous.
  $c) 10,000 times more luminous.
   d) 100,000,000 times more luminous.
   e) The stars have the same more luminosity.

Which property of a star would not change if we could observe it
from twice as far away?
   a) Angular size
  $b) Color
   c) Flux
   d) Parallax
   e) Proper Motion
                             
Suppose that two stars are at equal distance and have the same
radius, but one has a temperature that is about twice as great as
the other.  The flux from the hotter star is
  $a) about 16 times greater
   b) about 16 times less
   c) about 20 per cent greater
   d) about 20 per cent less
   e) Not enough information given to answer the question
                                                              
Star A has a radius R and temperature T.  At the same distance
from Earth, star B has a radius 4R and temperature T/2.  Which
star appears to be brighter?
   a) A
   b) B
  $c) Both stars appear to be the same brightness
   d) Cannot tell from information given

Two stars have the same temperature, but the radius of one is
twice that of the other.  How much brighter is the larger star?
   a) the same because luminosity depends only on temperature
   b) 2
  $c) 4
   d) 8
   e) 16

Consider two stars in constellation Pasta:
        Alpha Tortellini - bright in UV, dim in IR
        Beta Ziti - dim in UV, bright in IR
There is little or no dust along the line of sight to Pasta.
Which star is hotter?
  $a) Alpha Tortellini
   b) Beta Ziti
   c) Both same temperature

A main sequence star is stable because of self-regulation:
   a) the nuclear reaction rate does not depend on temperature.
   b) a slight contraction decreases the nuclear reaction rate.
  $c) a slight contraction leads to higher gas pressure.
   d) a slight contraction leads to lower internal pressure.

