1. If an electron is completely detached from an atom
a) the atom is ionized.
b) the atom is in its ground state.
c) the atom must be in a molecule.
d) the atom is an isotope.
e) none of the above.

2. We can determine the distance to a galaxy that contains Cepheid variable stars by using 
a) the period-colour relation
b) the mass-luminosity relation
c) the mass-radius relation
d) the velocity-distance relation
e) the period-luminosity relation

3. An atom of nitrogen with 7 electrons, 7 protons and 7 neutrons has an atomic number and atomic weight of
a) 7 and 7, respectively 
b) 14 and 7, respectively 
c) 7 and 21, respectively 
d) 14 and 21, respectively 
e) 7 and 14, respectively

4. The Doppler effect
a) explains the rainbow of visible light
b) causes a prism to form a spectrum
c) causes the speed of light to be finite
d) is the change in wavelength from a source moving towards or away from us 
e) was used by de Broglie to study quantum mechanics

5. You are moving to west at 0.75c and your friend is moving to the east at 0.75c. If you direct a light beam at your friend, and your friend directs a light beam at you, then
a) neither beam will reach the ship to which it is directed
b) you will see your friend’s light arrive at a speed of 1.5c, and your friend will see your
light arrive at a speed of 1.5c
c) you will see your friend’s light arrive at a speed of c, and your friend will see your light arrive at a speed of c
d) one of you will see light arrive at a speed of c, and the other will see light arrive at 1.5c
e) none of the above

6. What did Planck use to solve the blackbody problem? 
a) that light is made up of waves
b) that electrons have a wavelength
c) that when you shine light on a metal it produces a current 
d) that light interferes with itself
e) that light comes in packets of energy

7. The spectral lines of a star are observed to be shifted toward larger wavelengths. This shows
a) that the star is relatively cool.
b) that the star is very hot.
c) that the star is moving away from us.
d) that the star is approaching us.
e) that it is impossible to tell anything with information given.

8. Parallax to a star would be easier to measure if:
a) The distance between the observer and the star were larger.
b) The Earth moved more slowly in its orbit (took longer than a year to orbit the Sun) 
c) We lived on Mars
d) all of above
e) none of the above

9. In order to be classified as a dwarf planet in our Solar System, a body must orbit the Sun and
a) be round.
b) not be a moon.
c) clear its orbit of other objects.
d) all of the above.
e) only answers a and b.

10. A statement was made in class that, “The vacuum is not empty.” This referred to the fact: 
a) That the bag has not been emptied lately
b) That quarks and electrons are continually being created and destroyed
c) That the vacuum has many atoms in it
d) That electrons and positrons are continually created and destroyed
e) None of the above

11. Assume you are observing a rotating spiral galaxy. If you could suddenly turn off gravity
what would happen?
a) The galaxy would collapse down to a point
b) The galaxy would fly apart
c) The galaxy would rotate more quickly
d) Nothing would happen-- the galaxy would keep rotating at the same rate 
e) The galaxy would start rotating in the opposite direction

12. Which of the following characteristics do NOT apply to giant elliptical galaxies?
a) Rapidly rotating
b) Not forming many stars
c) Lacking spiral arms
d) Found in the centres of galaxy clusters 
e) All of the above

13. The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle tells us that
a) knowing the exact energy also tells us exactly the time.
b) determining the energy more accurately leads to a more accurate determination of time.
c) determining the energy more accurately leads to a less accurate determination of
time.
d) the accuracy of knowing the energy is independent of the accuracy of knowing the time.
e) none of the above

14. The distance between the Sun and the nearest star is smaller than the distance between the
Milky Way and the our nearest neighbour (Andromeda) by a factor of
a) A few tens
b) A hundred
c) A thousand
d) A million
e) A billion

15. Atoms make spectral lines because
a) electrons have only certain allowed orbits.
b) photons have only certain allowed orbits. 
c) speed of light in a vacuum is a constant. 
d) light consists of waves.
e) none of the above

16. An astronomer finds an object at a distance of 1,000 lightyears from Earth. Based on the distance, which of the following is this object most likely to be?
a) An object in the Kuiper Belt
b) an artificial satellite orbiting the Earth
c) the blackhole at the centre of the Milky Way
d) a galaxy
e) a star in our galaxy

17. We can study how galaxies evolve because
a) galaxies are transparent to visible light
b) the further away we look, the further back in time we see 
c) we can watch how they interact in real time
d) early astronomers kept good records that we can use today 
e) all of the above

18. As you move to higher altitude above the Earth, what happens to you?
a) your weight decreases and your mass stays the same.
b) your weight and mass decrease
c) your weight increases and your mass stays the same 
d) your weight and mass stay the same
e) impossible to know

19. If you draw a spacetime diagram, the worldline of something moving at the speed of light in your reference frame is
a) horizontal.
b) slanted.
c) vertical.
d) curved.
e) a circle.

20. Which of the following is false?
a) The order of events can be different for observers in different reference frames.
b) From your point of view, time runs slower in the reference frame of anyone moving relative to
you.
c) If one observer measures two events to be simultaneous, all observers must agree on their simultaneity.
d) Time dilation is an observationally verified fact.
e) Time runs slower in a high-speed rocket ship.

21. You are observing a star about 500 trillion km (50 lightyears) away. How old is the most recent information you can get about this star?
a) 50 years
b) 300,000 seconds
c) This can't be determined without having more information. 
d) 500 trillion seconds
e) 500 years

22. Which was the final prediction of General Relativity experimentally observed? 
a) Gravitational Lensing
b) Gravitational Redshift
c) Gravitational Length Contraction 
d) Gravitational Waves
e) Gravitational Time Dilation

23. In the raisin bread analogy for the Universe, what do the raisins represent? 
a) stars
b) intergalactic space
c) black holes
d) galaxies
e) something else

24. In what way is general relativity more general (deals with more situations) than special relativity?
a) It includes accelerated motion but not gravitation.
b) It includes accelerated motion and gravitation.
c) It includes only constant, unaccelerated motion.
d) It includes only motion at the speed of light.
e) None of the above

25. Suppose we look at two distant galaxies: Galaxy 1 is twice as far away as Galaxy 2. In that case,
a) Galaxy 1 must be twice as big as Galaxy 2
b) we are seeing Galaxy 1 as it looked at an earlier time in the history of the universe than Galaxy 2
c) we are seeing Galaxy 1 as it looked at a later time in the history of the universe than Galaxy 2
d) Galaxy 2 must be twice as old as Galaxy 1. 
e) none of the above

26. Which is the weakest of the fundamental forces in the Universe? 
a) weak force
b) electromagnetic force 
c) strong force
d) gravitational force 
e) none of the above

27. The Milky Way star, Sirius, is 9 light-years from the Sun while the Milky Way star, Canopus,
is 100 light-years from the Sun. Hubble’s Law implies that:
a) Sirius is moving at the same speed as Canopus
b) Sirius is moving more slowly than Canopus
c) Sirius and Canopus are BOTH moving away from the Sun 
d) both b & c
e) none of the above

28. During one lecture, a thought experiment was discussed that involved a skateboarder. The main point of the discussion was to show
a) that light follows a curved path.
b) that the speed of light is constant.
c) that different observers could obtain different measures of time.
d) that different observers see light redshifted by different amounts.
e) none of the above.

29. Famous observations were made in 1919 to test the prediction of Einstein’s general theory of relativity. The main reason that it was done during a total eclipse of the sun was
a) so that the star light would follow a curved path
b) so that star light that passed close to the sun would be visible
c) so that the light could pass close to the moon
d) so that the gravitational force from the sun and moon would be combined 
e) none of the above

30. Which of the following are the correct standard units of mass, distance and time?
a) kg, light yrs, yrs
b) g, m, s
c) kg, m, s
d) g, light yrs, yrs
e) none of the above