Which of the following has your "cosmic address" in the correct order?

a.) You, Earth, Local Group, Local Supercluster, solar system, Milky Way Galaxy, universe
b.) You, Earth, solar system, Milky Way Galaxy, Local Group, Local Supercluster, universe
c.) You, Earth, solar system, Local Group, Milky Way Galaxy, Local Supercluster, universe
d.) You, Earth, Milky Way Galaxy, solar system, Local Group, Local Supercluster, universe
e.) You, Earth, solar system, Local Group, Local Supercluster, Milky Way Galaxy, universe
b.) You, Earth, solar system, Milky Way Galaxy, Local Group, Local Supercluster, universe

When we look at an object that is 1,000 light-years away we see it _________.

a.) as it was 1,000 light-years ago
b.) as it was 1,000 years ago
c.) looking just the same as our ancestors would have seen it 1,000 years ago
d.) as it is right now, but it appears 1,000 times dimmer
b.) as it was 1,000 years ago

Suppose we look at two distant galaxies: Galaxy 1 is twice as far away as Galaxy 2. In that case _________.

a.) we are seeing Galaxy 1 as it looked at a later time in the history of the universe than Galaxy 2
b.) Galaxy 2 must be twice as old as Galaxy 1
c.) Galaxy 1 must be twice as big as Galaxy 2
d.) we are seeing Galaxy 1 as it looked at an earlier time in the history of the universe than Galaxy 2
d.) we are seeing Galaxy 1 as it looked at an earlier time in the history of the universe than Galaxy 2

Could we see a galaxy that is 20 billion light-years away? (Assume that we mean a "lookback time" of 20 billion years.)

a.) Yes, we have already detected galaxies at that distance.
b.) No, because a galaxy could not possibly be that far away.
c.) No, because it would be beyond the bounds of our observable universe.
d.) Yes, if we had a big enough telescope.
c.) No, because it would be beyond the bounds of our observable universe.

Suppose we make a scale model of our solar system, with the Sun the size of a grapefruit. Which of the following best describes what the planets would look like?

a.) The planets are all much smaller than the Sun and are spread out evenly over a distance about the length of a large classroom.
b.) The planets range in size from about the size of a marble to the size of a baseball. They are spread out over a region about the size of a football field.
c.) The planets are all much smaller than the Sun. Four planets are located within a few centimeters of the Sun, and four planets are located at distances ranging up to about a meter.
d.) The planets are all much smaller than the Sun. Four planets are within about 20 meters of the Sun, while the rest planets are spread much farther apart.
d.) The planets are all much smaller than the Sun. Four planets are within about 20 meters of the Sun, while the rest planets are spread much farther apart.

If you could count stars at a rate of about one per second, how long would it take to count all the stars in the Milky Way Galaxy?

a.) Several weeks
b.) Several years
c.) Several days
d.) Several thousand years
d.) Several thousand years

The total number of stars in the observable universe is about _________.

a.)the same as the number of grains of sand in a school sandbox
b.) the same as the number of grains of sand on all the beaches on Earth
c.) the same as the number of atoms that make up the Earth
d.) 100 billion
b.) the same as the number of grains of sand on all the beaches on Earth

Using the ideas discussed in your textbook, in what sense are we "star stuff"?

a.) The overall chemical composition of our bodies is about the same as that of stars.
b.) We could not survive without light from our star, the Sun.
c.) Movie stars and other people are all made of the same stuff, so we all have the potential to be famous.
d.) Nearly every atom from which we are made was once inside of a star.
d.) Nearly every atom from which we are made was once inside of a star.

How are galaxies important to our existence?

a.) Without galaxies, there could not have been a Big Bang.
b.) Deep in their centers, galaxies created the elements from which we are made.
c.) Without galaxies, the universe could not be expanding.
d.) Galaxies recycle material from one generation of stars to the next, and without this recycling we could not exist.
d.) Galaxies recycle material from one generation of stars to the next, and without this recycling we could not exist.

If we imagine the history of the universe compressed into one year, dinosaurs became extinct _________.

a.) about an hour ago
b.) yesterday morning
c.) about 6 months ago
d.) about 3 weeks ago
b.) yesterday morning

Relative to the age of the universe, how old is our solar system?

a.) It is about one-third the age of the universe.
b.) It is between about 5% and 10% as old as the universe.
c.) It is nearly the same age as the universe.
d.) It is about 1% as old as the universe.
a.) It is about one-third the age of the universe.

How do the speeds at which we are moving with Earth's rotation and orbit compare to the speeds of more familiar objects?

a.) Earth's rotation carries most people around the axis at about the speed at which the Space Shuttle orbits Earth, and Earth's orbit carries us around the Sun at nearly the speed of light.
b.) Earth's rotation carries most people around the axis faster than a commercial jet travels, and Earth's orbit carries us around the Sun faster than the Space Shuttle orbits Earth.
c.) Earth's rotation carries most people around the axis at about the speed of a car on the freeway, and Earth's orbit carries us around the Sun at about the speed of a commercial jet.
d.) Earth's rotation carries most people around the axis at about the speed of a commercial jet, and Earth's orbit carries us around the Sun at about the speed of a military jet.
b.) Earth's rotation carries most people around the axis faster than a commercial jet travels, and Earth's orbit carries us around the Sun faster than the Space Shuttle orbits Earth.

Why do the patterns of the stars in our sky look the same from year to year?

a.) Because the stars in the constellations are so far away.
b.) Because the stars in the constellations are not moving.
c.) Because the stars in the constellations all move at the same speeds and in the same directions, so they don't change their relative positions.
d.) Because the stars in the constellations move so slowly --- typically about the speed of a snail --- that their motions are not noticeable.
a.) Because the stars in the constellations are so far away.

Where is our solar system located within the Milky Way Galaxy?

a.) At the far edge of the galaxy's visible disk
b.) Roughly halfway between the center and the edge of the visible disk of the galaxy
c.) Very near the center of the galaxy
d.) In the halo of the galaxy
b.) Roughly halfway between the center and the edge of the visible disk of the galaxy

Astronomers infer that the universe is expanding because distant galaxies all appear to _________.

a.) be moving away from us, with more distant ones moving faster
b.) be made mostly of dark matter
c.) be growing in size
d.) rotate rapidly
a.) be moving away from us, with more distant ones moving faster

Which statement about motion in the universe is not true?

a.) The mysterious dark matter is the fastest-moving material in the universe.
b.) Except for a few nearby galaxies, all other galaxies are moving away from us.
c.) Your speed of rotation around Earth's axis is faster if you live near the equator than if you live near the North Pole.
d.) Some stars in the Milky Way Galaxy are moving toward us and others are moving away from us.